SYSTEM_SPEC.md, before:

# FPL Predictor System Specification

The FPL Predictor is a high-performance, automated intelligence engine designed to master Fantasy Premier League through probabilistic forecasting and self-stabilizing reinforcement learning.

## 1. System Architecture

The engine follows a modular, three-layer architecture:

- **Data Layer**: Ingests raw data from the official FPL API and live match event feeds.
- **Intelligence Layer ("The Brain")**: A 6-head specialized XGBoost system that decomposes player performance into discrete probabilistic events.
- **Presentation Layer**: A Next.js dashboard hosted on Cloudflare, synced via a cross-repository CI/CD pipeline.

### High-Level Flow
```mermaid
graph TD
    API[FPL Official API] -->|Raw JSON| DM[Data Manager]
    DM -->|Market Data| FF[Feature Factory]
    FF -->|Engineered Features| XGB[6-Head Probabilistic Engine]
    
    subgraph "Intelligence Core"
    XGB -->|Event Probabilities| CMD[Engine Commander]
    CMD -->|xP Calculation| SB[Squad Builder]
    end
    
    SB -->|Top 15 & Captains| JSON[dashboard_data.json]
    JSON -->|Repository Dispatch| Portfolio[Personal Portfolio]
    
    subgraph "Vesuvius Layer"
    XGB -->|Raw Predictions| MC[Monte Carlo Simulation]
    MC -->|Haul Probability| CMD
    end
```

---

## 2. The 6-Head Probabilistic Engine

Unlike traditional models that predict "total points" directly (which are high-variance), this engine predicts **individual event outcomes** using specialized heads.

### Core Targets
1. **Goals head**: Poisson regression for scoring probability.
2. **Assists head**: Poisson regression for playmaking probability.
3. **Clean Sheets head**: Logistic regression for defensive viability.
4. **Saves head**: Poisson regression for goalkeeper point floors.
5. **Bonus points head**: Probabilistic ranking based on historical BPS efficiency.
6. **Defcon head**: A specialized risk head predicting defensive contribution points.

### Vesuvius Simulation Layer
The engine adds a secondary simulation layer to predict **Double-Digit Hauls (11+ points)**.
- **Algorithm**: Monte Carlo simulation using Poisson (goals/assists) and Binomial (clean sheets) distributions.
- **Simulation Count**: 1,500 iterations per player.
- **Brave Mode Leak**: 50% of the simulation-based Matchup Boost (targeting leaky defenses) is leaked back into core **xP** to influence Starting XI selection.
- **Brave Score (Captaincy)**: Captain candidates are ranked using a `70/30` blend of Mean xP and Haul Probability.
- **Haul Alert**: A `haul_alert: true` flag is triggered when the simulated probability of $\geq 11$ points exceeds **20%**.

### Intelligence Features
- **Seasonal Actuals**: Dynamic tracking of a player's current season form vs. historical baseline.
- **Clinicality Index**: Measures goal conversion efficiency relative to expected threat.
- **FDR-Relative Weighting**: Adjusts feature importance based on upcoming fixture difficulty.

---

## 3. Stability Sentinel (Self-Improvement)

The system features a self-correcting feedback loop that evaluates its own performance weekly and updates its confidence scores.

### Noise Gate & A/B Tracking
Reduces the global learning rate (`effective_lr`) during "chaotic" gameweeks where the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) exceeds historical norms.
- **A/B Metric logging**: The engine continuously tracks **mae_conservative** vs **mae_brave** to validate the effectiveness of the matchup-boost targeting strategy.

### Hysteresis (Trust Momentum)
Uses an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) for updating model confidence scores. The engine requires **sustained accuracy** over multiple weeks to increase trust in a specific model head.

### Squad Accuracy Filter (7/11 Rule)
The system tracks the "Hit Rate" of its top 11 recommendations. If the model fails to predict the viability of at least 60% of the suggested squad, it triggers a defensive learning mode to find feature drift.

---

## 4. Automation & Deployment

### Virtual Loop
The system lives in GitHub Actions and executes on a **12-hour heartbeat**.

1. **Deadline Sentinel**: Checks the `deadline_history.json`. It triggers a full refresh if:
   - Today is exactly **2 days before** a deadline.
   - The FPL API reports a **change in deadline time** (handling rescheduling).
2. **Validation**: Before any data is pushed, `validate_deployment.py` runs a series of health checks (schema validation, sanity ranges).
3. **Cross-Repo Sync**: On successful validation, the engine pushes `dashboard_data.json` and triggers a `repository_dispatch` to the portfolio repository for live deployment.

Commit message:

feat: implement 'Brave' model, historical tracking, and squad efficiency metrics

SYSTEM_SPEC.md, after:

# FPL Predictor System Specification

The FPL Predictor is a high-performance, automated intelligence engine designed to master Fantasy Premier League through probabilistic forecasting and self-stabilizing reinforcement learning.

## 1. System Architecture

The engine follows a modular, three-layer architecture:

- **Data Layer**: Ingests raw data from the official FPL API and live match event feeds.
- **Intelligence Layer ("The Brain")**: A 6-head specialized XGBoost system that decomposes player performance into discrete probabilistic events.
- **Presentation Layer**: A Next.js dashboard hosted on Cloudflare, synced via a cross-repository CI/CD pipeline.

### High-Level Flow
```mermaid
graph TD
    API[FPL Official API] -->|Raw JSON| DM[Data Manager]
    DM -->|Market Data| FF[Feature Factory]
    FF -->|Engineered Features| XGB[6-Head Probabilistic Engine]
    
    subgraph "Intelligence Core"
    XGB -->|Event Probabilities| CMD[Engine Commander]
    CMD -->|xP Calculation| SB[Squad Builder]
    end
    
    SB -->|Top 15 & Captains| JSON[dashboard_data.json]
    JSON -->|Repository Dispatch| Portfolio[Personal Portfolio]
    
    subgraph "Vesuvius Layer"
    XGB -->|Raw Predictions| MC[Monte Carlo Simulation]
    MC -->|Haul Probability| CMD
    end
```

---

## 2. The 6-Head Probabilistic Engine

Unlike traditional models that predict "total points" directly (which are high-variance), this engine predicts **individual event outcomes** using specialized heads.

### Core Targets
1. **Goals head**: Poisson regression for scoring probability.
2. **Assists head**: Poisson regression for playmaking probability.
3. **Clean Sheets head**: Logistic regression for defensive viability.
4. **Saves head**: Poisson regression for goalkeeper point floors.
5. **Bonus points head**: Probabilistic ranking based on historical BPS efficiency.
6. **Defcon head**: A specialized risk head predicting defensive contribution points.

### Vesuvius Simulation Layer
The engine adds a secondary simulation layer to predict **Double-Digit Hauls (11+ points)**.
- **Algorithm**: Monte Carlo simulation using Poisson (goals/assists) and Binomial (clean sheets) distributions.
- **Simulation Count**: 1,500 iterations per player.
- **Brave Mode Leak**: 50% of the simulation-based Matchup Boost (targeting leaky defenses) is leaked back into core **xP** to influence Starting XI selection.
- **Brave Score (Captaincy)**: Captain candidates are ranked using a `70/30` blend of Mean xP and Haul Probability.
- **Haul Alert**: A `haul_alert: true` flag is triggered when the simulated probability of $\geq 11$ points exceeds **20%**.

### Intelligence Features
- **Seasonal Actuals**: Dynamic tracking of a player's current season form vs. historical baseline.
- **Clinicality Index**: Measures goal conversion efficiency relative to expected threat.
- **FDR-Relative Weighting**: Adjusts feature importance based on upcoming fixture difficulty.

---

## 3. Stability Sentinel (Self-Improvement)

The system features a self-correcting feedback loop that evaluates its own performance weekly and updates its confidence scores.

### Noise Gate & A/B Tracking
Reduces the global learning rate (`effective_lr`) during "chaotic" gameweeks where the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) exceeds historical norms.
- **A/B Metric Logging**: `trainer.py` now logs Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for both `xp_conservative` and `xp_brave`, allowing empirical comparison of the "Brave" strategy performance.

## Data Retention & History

The system maintains a **Stateless JSON Database** in the frontend public directory:
- **Snapshots**: Every `generate_static.py` run archives a full `gw_{id}.json` in `public/history/`.
- **Discovery**: A `metadata.json` tracks available gameweeks.
- **Frontend Switcher**: The UI allows toggle between "Live" and historical predictions, enabling retrospective analysis of model performance.

### Hysteresis (Trust Momentum)
Uses an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) for updating model confidence scores. The engine requires **sustained accuracy** over multiple weeks to increase trust in a specific model head.

### Squad Accuracy Filter (7/11 Rule)
The system tracks the "Hit Rate" of its top 11 recommendations. If the model fails to predict the viability of at least 60% of the suggested squad, it triggers a defensive learning mode to find feature drift.

---

## 4. Automation & Deployment

### Virtual Loop
The system lives in GitHub Actions and executes on a **12-hour heartbeat**.

1. **Deadline Sentinel**: Checks the `deadline_history.json`. It triggers a full refresh if:
   - Today is exactly **2 days before** a deadline.
   - The FPL API reports a **change in deadline time** (handling rescheduling).
2. **Validation**: Before any data is pushed, `validate_deployment.py` runs a series of health checks (schema validation, sanity ranges).
3. **Cross-Repo Sync**: On successful validation, the engine pushes `dashboard_data.json` and triggers a `repository_dispatch` to the portfolio repository for live deployment.
